<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<!-- Chapter 1 -->
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Herodotus, Strabo, etc. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 2 -->
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Pliny, Diogenes Laertius, Apollonius, Varrò, etc. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Apollonius, Pliny, Tertullian, etc. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 8 -->
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See German newspapers of March 1824, for particulars of the discoveries attributed to Gruithuisen. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Macrobius, <i>Saturnal</i>: <abbr>lib.</abbr> 3. cap. 8; Tertullian, <i>Apolog</i>., cap. 15. The moon was also honoured as the god moon. In the German language <em>moon</em> is masculine. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Menander, <abbr>lib.</abbr> 1. cap. 15, <i>in Rhetor</i>, graec. veter. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Athen: <abbr>lib.</abbr> 2. <i><abbr>ed.</abbr> Casaub</i>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 57. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Antonio di Ulloa. See Carli, <i>Lettere Americane</i>, par. 4. lett. 7. Milan, 1784. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 9 -->
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Robertson’s <i>Hist. of America</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>.<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A fact. <a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 10 -->
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i>Instruction in the Art of Long Life</i>, by Hufeland. <a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Lucian, Dial. Menip. and Chiro. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Pindar, Strabo, and Pliny. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i>Lettres Philosophiques</i>: let. 11. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 11 -->
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tasso, during his mental hallucinations, used to fancy, like Socrates, that he was visited by a friendly spirit, with which he would hold long conversations. Manso, in his life of Tasso, mentions this, and states that he was once present during such a colloquy or soliloquy between Tasso and his imagined companion. <a href="chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollonius, <i>Hist. Comment</i>., cap. 46, etc. <a href="chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 12 -->
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Camoens’ <i>Lusiad</i>, canto 5. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cicero says: “Labour and pain are not identical. Labour is a toilsome function of body or mind⁠—pain an unpleasant disturbance in the body. When they cut Marius’ veins, it was pain; when he marched at the head of the troops in a great heat, it was labour.”⁠—<i>Tusc. Quaest.</i> <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Seneca, <i>Natural. Question</i>: <abbr>lib.</abbr> 6, cap. 2. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 13 -->
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Parini lived 1729⁠–⁠1799. As a philosopher and satirist he seems to have exercised no slight influence over the mind of Leopardi. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <abbr>lib.</abbr> 2, cap. 20. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ex: Fragment <i>Sur le goût</i>, etc. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is in the order of Providence that the inventive, generative, constitutive mind should come first; and then that the patient and collective mind should follow, and elaborate the pregnant queries and illumining guesses of the former⁠—S. T. Coleridge, <i>Table Talk</i>, <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 8, 1830. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De Senectute. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare the following from H. Rogers’ <i>Essay on Leibnitz</i>: “The condition of great philosophers is far less enviable than that of great poets. The former can never possess so large a circle of readers under any circumstances; but that number is still further abridged by the fact that even the truths the philosopher has taught or discovered form but stepping-stones in the progress of science, and are afterwards digested, systematised, and better expounded in other works composed by inferior men.” <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 14 -->
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See note. <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De Senectute. <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Frederic Ruysch (1638⁠–⁠1731) was one of the cleverest anatomists Holland has ever produced. For sixty years he held a professorship of anatomy at Amsterdam, during which time he devoted himself to his art. He obtained from Swammerdam his secret of preserving corpses by means of an injection of coloured wax. Ruysch, it is said, also made use of his own blood for this purpose. His subjects, when prepared, looked like living beings, and showed no signs of corruption. Czar Peter visited Holland in 1698, and was amazed at what he saw in Ruysch’s studio. In 1717 the Czar again visited Holland, and succeeded in inducing Ruysch to dispose of his collection of animals, mummies, etc. These were all transported to <abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg. Ruysch formed a second collection as valuable as the first, which after his death was publicly sold. <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 15 -->
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A fictitious personage. <a href="chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See “Dialogue Between Fashion and Death,” p. 19. <a href="chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 17 -->
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare Shakespeare’s Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>., Part 2, Act 4, sc. 3. <i>Falstaff:</i> ”⁠ ⁠… nor a man cannot make him laugh;⁠—but that’s no marvel, he drinks no wine.” <a href="chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 18 -->
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a poetical not philosophical conclusion. Speaking philosophically, existence, which has had no beginning, will have no ending. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 20 -->
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Copernicus did in effect dedicate his book on the <i>Revolution of the Celestial Bodies</i>, the printing of which was only completed a few days before his death, to Pope Paul <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. The system expounded therein was condemned by a decree of Paul <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. in 1616. This condemnation remained in force until 1821, when it was revoked by Pius <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. The sun is supposed to be in the centre, and motionless; the earth and the rest of the planets move round it in elliptical orbits. The heavens and stars are supposed to be stationary, and their apparent diurnal motion from east to west is imputed to the earth’s motion from west to east. <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 22 -->
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Ennui is a state only experienced by the intelligent. The greater the mind, the more constant, painful, and terrible is the ennui it suffers. Ennui is in some respects the sublimest of human sentiments” (<i>Pensieri</i> Nos. 67 and 68.) <a href="chapter-22.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Plotinus</i> was born 204 <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr>. He began teaching philosophy in Rome, and was highly esteemed at court. Eunapius says of him, “The heavenly elevation of his mind, and his perplexed style, made him very tiresome and unpleasant.” He was ascetic in his habits; disparaged patriotism; depreciated material things; purposely forgot his birthday; and acted altogether rather as a spectator of other men’s lives than as a living man himself. <a href="chapter-22.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Porphyrius</i> was born 233 <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr>. He was a pupil of Plotinus, and like him established a school of philosophy at Rome. From study of the writings of Plotinus he fell into a state of disgust with life, and retiring from Rome, lived alone in a solitary and wild part of Sicily. Here he determined to put an end to his life by starvation. He was found by Plotinus, who had followed him from Rome, in a state of extreme weakness, and was, by his wise counsels, dissuaded from completing his intention. <a href="chapter-22.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Chapter 24 -->
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Written in 1834. <a href="chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
